Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's go.
Good afternoon.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So, um, William Tell overture by Rossini.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, I said today I would start by or I
NOTE CONF
would have, as part of my lecture.
Um, opportunity for you to ask questions about the, uh,
NOTE CONF
programming project.
So for those of you who haven't found it yet,
NOTE CONF
this is the course learn page and you go down
and you find programming project.
NOTE CONF
And there's the instructions and there's two files to download.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I don't know how many of you have read
this handout, but, uh, the basic exercise is, um, you've
NOTE CONF
got the sequin calculus.
So this is an exercise which combines, uh, functional programming
NOTE CONF
and computation and logic.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it's a SQL calculus.
You've learned this from Julian.
NOTE CONF
And those are the rules.
And you know how to do proofs using the rules.
NOTE CONF
And here are two examples of doing proofs starting from
a sequence like this one here at the bottom.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
Won't leave them out alone.
NOTE CONF
Won't allow me to highlight that.
Yes it will.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so starting with a sequence like the one at
the bottom and then working upwards, applying the rules where
NOTE CONF
each rule.
Here you can see which ones have been applied.
NOTE CONF
And some of them, some of them have one, uh,
premise.
NOTE CONF
And so you get a sort of straight line proof.
And some of them have two premises like um, or
NOTE CONF
left here.
Um, has two premises.
NOTE CONF
That's this rule, uh, here, this one bottom left.
And so the proof branches and at the end you
NOTE CONF
get either no premises like this, this proof here, no
premises, uh, or you end up with, uh, some, uh,
NOTE CONF
premises which are so-called simple sequence, meaning that they don't
have any connections, connectives in them.
NOTE CONF
And so here's, here's one and here is another one.
And you can't take these any further because there's no
NOTE CONF
connectives to um, there's no connectives to, uh, take apart.
And the immediate rule doesn't apply because the things on
NOTE CONF
the left and right are different.
Okay, so you know this already.
NOTE CONF
And what you're supposed to do with this exercise is
to implement this in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so you're given representations of, uh, propositions in sequence.
NOTE CONF
And your job is to implement a function.
That takes a sequence and gives a list of sequence.
NOTE CONF
So that's the sequence at the bottom.
Could you stop talking please.
NOTE CONF
This is the sequence at the bottom.
And this is the and this is the list of
NOTE CONF
sequence that are the assumptions, uh, the basic the simple
sequence that, uh, lead via that proof to that sequence.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you are supposed to compute that.
NOTE CONF
And uh, here are some examples of what it should
do.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you know, for the for the first proof
up that I showed you this one here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, the thing at the bottom that involves, uh, uh,
NOTE CONF
and or of an end of an or with some
negations.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, that's this sequence here.
And when you do the proof, you get the list
NOTE CONF
of no, uh, sequences, assumptions, which is, uh, because up
at the top here, there are no, uh, assumptions required
NOTE CONF
for this proof.
You know, and for the other one, for the other
NOTE CONF
example.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
I show it to you again.
I mean, those of you who've read this carefully and
NOTE CONF
thought about it, this is all.
You know this already.
NOTE CONF
But for those who haven't, I just wanted to make
sure you know what I'm talking about.
NOTE CONF
So for this proof, you end up with, uh, two
simple sequence at the top, which happened to be identical
NOTE CONF
in this case.
In this particular proof, There's more than one possible proof.
NOTE CONF
And so you end up with, um, you try this.
And in my implementation, you end up with, uh, with
NOTE CONF
a list, with one simple sequence.
Um, but, uh, it would also be correct if you
NOTE CONF
have two that are, um, different representations of the same
1 or 2 that are identical, but, but duplicated.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, because we're using unordered list to represent sets anyway,
NOTE CONF
so that's what you're supposed to do.
And um, there's some suggestions of how you might proceed,
NOTE CONF
but you can do it differently if you wish.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's the, um, the compulsory part of the project
is to implement this one function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is not broken down into, into um, substeps
NOTE CONF
like it would be in a tutorial exercise.
You just have to implement this one function.
NOTE CONF
And that's the only thing that matters.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then in the, uh, in the optional part, uh,
add implication and by implication and there's the rules and
NOTE CONF
there's an example, proof and uh, same function.
But it should work with implication and by implication.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then finally, if you, uh, if you're bored and
NOTE CONF
want to challenge, you can try to do the challenge
part, which is, um, trying to make the proofs as
NOTE CONF
short as possible and counting how many steps they take.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's the exercise or that's the project.
And um, in order to make your lives easier and
NOTE CONF
also to make your tutors lives easier and to make
my, my life easier, um, I decided on this exercise.
NOTE CONF
I give you, um, I give you the tests that
are going to be used for marking.
NOTE CONF
And so.
and you can and you can run them before you
NOTE CONF
submit.
Or that is to say, when you submit, they will
NOTE CONF
run automatically and you can see what the results are.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, and they're broken up into categories.
So if any of these tests work, any of these
NOTE CONF
tests work, you get one point.
If all of these tests plus the next one work,
NOTE CONF
you get two points.
So these are these are these represent basic single rule
NOTE CONF
applications.
This one is a straight line.
NOTE CONF
Uh proof no branching.
Uh, if most or all of these work as well
NOTE CONF
then you get three points.
These look complicated.
NOTE CONF
Um, I generated them with quick check just to get
some some things, some sequence that, you know, exercise different
NOTE CONF
rules.
So, um, they don't prove anything very interesting.
NOTE CONF
They're just, uh, they're just, um.
Examples.
NOTE CONF
I think the first two are the two examples that
are actually in the higher up in the handout.
NOTE CONF
And to get four points you also have to handle
all these.
NOTE CONF
And these handle these have some implication and by implication
in them okay.
NOTE CONF
And then there's some for the challenge questions.
The challenge part if you if you want to try
NOTE CONF
that and I've included some proofs here with um, uh,
you know 491 steps.
NOTE CONF
Um, so these proofs can get to be quite large.
So that's the exercise.
NOTE CONF
Who has questions?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Can you get.
More than once?
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I don't get that.
Can you, um, can we submit it more than one?
NOTE CONF
Well, can you submit more ones?
Yeah, sure.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
You can can submit as many times as you want,
NOTE CONF
and you're encouraged to do that in order to test
your program as you go.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So, um, you know, for example.
NOTE CONF
So I suggest that you do, um, that one way
of proceeding is to implement the rules and then implement
NOTE CONF
your proof function that uses the implementation of the rules.
It's kind of obvious that you're going to have to
NOTE CONF
do that somehow.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so once you've implemented the rules um, well you
can't you can't get these tests to run until you've
NOTE CONF
also got a proof function because that's, that's, you know,
part of the test.
NOTE CONF
But, um, you could check that your rule implementations are
correct.
NOTE CONF
Um, there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So do that as much as you, as you wish.
Um, and only the last one counts.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
Sorry, it's not working.
NOTE CONF
Is the whole project out of, uh, four marks?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
So, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that's the that's I mean, I didn't want to
I didn't want to give it a finer granularity than
NOTE CONF
that.
Makes it harder to mark.
NOTE CONF
Um, simply.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
Oh, you do, you haven't.
NOTE CONF
You want this back?
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
1 to 4 or actually 0 to 4.
NOTE CONF
And the result will be multiplied by five to give
you a percentage.
NOTE CONF
Some.
Somehow it's broken.
NOTE CONF
I don't know, um, there's a switch inside, but, uh,
can you just speak up if.
NOTE CONF
There's something similar to the tutorial after this assessment?
No, this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's no tutorial following this.
NOTE CONF
So you just submit it and you get a mark
and um, and that's it.
NOTE CONF
Um, and by the way this is an exercise which,
um.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
This works Okay.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you had to talk louder.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I was going to say this this this exercise,
because it's a larger percentage of your mark.
NOTE CONF
Um, the rules, the usual rules on extensions.
And, uh, what's it called?
NOTE CONF
Time adjustments for students with disabilities apply.
Okay, so, um, so some students will be able to
NOTE CONF
submit it later than the deadline, but, you know, according
to the rules on those things.
NOTE CONF
So I don't know if you're familiar, familiar with those
rules, but, um, if you're not the, um, the, um,
NOTE CONF
student advisors will be able to help you.
Okay, but you've got three weeks.
NOTE CONF
I think it should be enough.
It took me a day or less than a day.
NOTE CONF
And by the way, I'll say my my solution is
about 100 lines of code.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but why don't you try anyway?
It's fun.
NOTE CONF
Hey.
Hi.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Is this, like, uh, is this project kind of a
NOTE CONF
tutorial ten or is there going to be also a
tutorial ten.
NOTE CONF
There is a tutorial ten there's a there's tutorials eight,
nine and ten.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Oh so this is, this is in addition to that
NOTE CONF
we've, we've reduced a little bit the, the load of
the tutorials.
NOTE CONF
Um eight nine and ten to give you a little
bit more time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So as I was saying that my, my solution, including
the, um, including the, uh, um, what's it called?
NOTE CONF
Challenge part is 100 lines of code.
So it's not a huge it's not a huge thing
NOTE CONF
that you have to write.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, any other questions?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, you don't have to actually produce code.
You just have to produce the list of assumptions.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, you don't have to produce I said code.
You don't have to produce proofs, okay?
NOTE CONF
You just produce the assumptions, the list of assumptions that
appear at the top of the proof.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Of course, in order to do that, you have to
NOTE CONF
do the proof.
But there is no representation of proofs in Haskell here.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
There's only representations of um.
NOTE CONF
Of, um, propositions in sequence.
I mean, if you wish you could represent proofs, but
NOTE CONF
it's not part of the exercise that you need to
you need to do anybody else.
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
I hope it'll be interesting.
NOTE CONF
Um, deadline last Friday of the of the semester.
So I will now move on to the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Which is, a commentary algorithms.
And I did the first half of this already.
NOTE CONF
Um, oops.
So I'll just carry on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
A few more problems I wanted to, to cover, uh,
NOTE CONF
in this lecture.
Um, what time is it?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I've.
Been.
NOTE CONF
Talking about a bunch of combinatorial problems.
Things like generating all the sublists of lists, the permutations
NOTE CONF
of a list.
All these problems with lists.
NOTE CONF
And, um, the last one of these on lists is
the problem of choosing um, um, k elements of a
NOTE CONF
list of length.
And I started off, uh, I introduced this last time
NOTE CONF
very briefly.
Um, so we know that there are two to the
NOTE CONF
n sub lists of a list.
If you've got a list of length n, okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and um, but choosing choosing k elements from a
list of length, and this is like all of the
NOTE CONF
sublists of length k of a list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um.
Sub lists uh, of uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
Of length of length.
Uh n so two to the n um.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
So this the choosing k elements.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's, uh, there's a notation and it's written like
this.
NOTE CONF
And you may have seen this in mathematics or in,
you know, or somewhere else.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is um.
Uh, a notation for this calculation.
NOTE CONF
And, um, this is, this is pronounced n, choose and
choose k and it's known as the binomial coefficient.
NOTE CONF
And the idea is that, for example, if you take
x plus one to the fourth.
NOTE CONF
The answer is um.
With this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this um, the coefficients here.
NOTE CONF
So this is one times x to the fourth, four
times x to the third and so forth.
NOTE CONF
And so the one here is um.
Is four choose for the four.
NOTE CONF
Here is four.
Choose three.
NOTE CONF
This is um for choose two.
This is for choose one and this is for choose
NOTE CONF
zero.
So the coefficient of the of the k th degree.
NOTE CONF
Uh uh what are they called term.
The case degree term of the polynomial is is calculated
NOTE CONF
this way.
And that works for any for any, you know, not
NOTE CONF
just for X plus one to the fourth, but for
other, um, other products.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, what's the number of these things that
there are and here's a program to do it.
NOTE CONF
So as I said, one program would be you, you,
um, you calculate all the sublists of, um, of, of
NOTE CONF
a list and there are two to the N of
them.
NOTE CONF
And then you filter the ones that are of length
k and you're done.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But, um, there's an awful lot more sublists of a
NOTE CONF
list than there are the ones of length k.
So this is kind of like the same, um, the
NOTE CONF
same, uh, problem with the way of doing it, as
I've mentioned with calculating permutations, by taking all of the,
NOTE CONF
um, what was it, uh, the Cartesian product of a
list with itself k times n times, and then filtering
NOTE CONF
out the ones that don't have repetitions Petitions.
Um, so, um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that doesn't work so well.
It functions, but it takes a long time.
NOTE CONF
So here is another way to do it.
And it's, it's it's based on this.
NOTE CONF
It's again based on this idea that I mentioned for
um, for Sublists, where you start with a list X1X2
NOTE CONF
and so forth, and you decide, um, for each one,
um, should, should it go in or out to, um,
NOTE CONF
to produce your, your I can't see.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Problem.
My multimedia, um, presentation have to keep pushing buttons.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So for each one of these, you're deciding whether it's
NOTE CONF
in or out.
Um, and, and so this was the reason why for
NOTE CONF
the sub list, we ended up with, uh, two to
the n choices.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here we've got the same sort of situation,
except where we've got the limit of K, which makes
NOTE CONF
it a little more complicated And so you end up
with this with this code here okay.
NOTE CONF
So choose K of a list.
And the list is of length n.
NOTE CONF
Here's the calculation of n being the length of that
list okay.
NOTE CONF
And you've got two base cases.
If k is zero then there's only one way of
NOTE CONF
of of of doing that.
And that's the empty list.
NOTE CONF
And if k is n there's only one way of
doing that.
NOTE CONF
And it's the whole list.
And the interesting cases where k is in between those
NOTE CONF
two extremes.
And here you've got the, the idea of, you know,
NOTE CONF
um, to include.
So in this case you're talking about an element X
NOTE CONF
here somewhere and you're deciding whether it's in or out.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is the element which is um which is x
here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can choose to, to leave it out.
NOTE CONF
And then you're talking about all the ways of choosing
K from all the other elements in the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's that's this part.
NOTE CONF
Or you can choose to put it in.
And that's the other part here okay.
NOTE CONF
But you can only put it in if the rest
of the of the lists that you're putting it into
NOTE CONF
have k minus one elements.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the recursive call here.
So the first call there was with choose k.
NOTE CONF
So k doesn't change.
Uh x is of course is the tail.
NOTE CONF
Uh here it changes.
You need k minus one.
NOTE CONF
So you're you're you're taking uh yeah.
Choose for a smaller number of elements okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a little more complicated than the sublists
but um similar idea okay.
NOTE CONF
And you can see, you can see that it works
here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I brought my laptop, but I forgot the
adaptor, so I can't show you the programs running today.
NOTE CONF
But they're there.
They're just what it says on the slide here.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so so for example, choosing choose three elements from
this list of of of of five letters, you get
NOTE CONF
these ten choices okay.
Because why why ten.
NOTE CONF
Um, because uh five choose three is equal to five
factorial over three factorial times two factorial, which is um.
NOTE CONF
And let's see what's, what's.
Yeah, it's, it's 120 divided by six times two okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay I'm going to skip the slide.
This is just all the properties that this thing satisfies.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And it works.
NOTE CONF
And, um, let me see.
How much time do I have?
NOTE CONF
A bit worried about running out of time.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I'll just.
I think I'll just breeze through this.
NOTE CONF
This one.
So this is now a problem.
NOTE CONF
That's about numbers rather than lists.
Although it involves lists as well.
NOTE CONF
But, um, I'll just say this is about, um, the,
the problem of giving a number, given a number, um,
NOTE CONF
all of the ways, uh, all of the lists of
numbers that add up to that number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, for example, it's called partitions.
NOTE CONF
So the partitions of five for example.
Uh 111111 or sorry 1111 1 or one one, one
NOTE CONF
two, or for example, two and 3 or 5 itself
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the um, there's a.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to I'm not going to go through
this in the interest of time because I want to
NOTE CONF
get to the end.
Um, uh, because the last problem is the only one
NOTE CONF
that doesn't involve, um, lists of numbers and things, and
I think it's worth getting that far.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But, um, so again, there's a fairly simple program that
NOTE CONF
does this.
All of these programs, they're, they're sort of combinations of
NOTE CONF
um comprehension and um, and um, recursion.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's the recursive call.
Um, that's a really powerful combination.
NOTE CONF
Um, to, to use those two things together so you
can write very short programs that do that do complicated
NOTE CONF
things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going to I'm not going to talk
about this, but, um, it's covered in the textbook.
NOTE CONF
And you can you can read this, um, afterwards if
you want.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions so far?
NOTE CONF
No.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the next.
NOTE CONF
The next one.
This is the last one that that, uh, well, it
NOTE CONF
involves lists and things.
Uh, or.
NOTE CONF
Well, pretty much anyway.
Um, so so this is a historical problem.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, uh, a long time ago, you went into
a shop and you wanted to buy something, and and
NOTE CONF
it had a price, and you gave them some money,
and, um, and they had to give you change because
NOTE CONF
the money you gave them might be more than the
price.
NOTE CONF
Nowadays.
You give them a credit, you just tap your credit
NOTE CONF
card and you're done.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But in the days, I mean, there are still people
who pay with cash.
NOTE CONF
Maybe some of you.
I don't pay any cash any more myself.
NOTE CONF
But, um, so it's not usually necessary anymore to do
this problem.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But the the problem is the problem here that that
NOTE CONF
is handled by this algorithm is if you've got a
sum of money that you have to give as change,
NOTE CONF
okay, you pay, you pay 10 and you have to
um, and the thing cost, uh, you know, 8, uh,
NOTE CONF
97 and so you have to give 1 and three
as change.
NOTE CONF
And so how do you, how do you give 1
and three and change if in your cash register you
NOTE CONF
only have, um, you know, uh, three 0.20 pieces and
a bunch of ten pieces and some 5 and some
NOTE CONF
two P's and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what are the possible choices of ways of combining
those coins to make a certain amount of money?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's what this is solving.
NOTE CONF
Does anybody here carry cash anymore?
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Lots of you.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I don't I was in a holiday on a
holiday in Sweden a couple of years ago for two
NOTE CONF
weeks, and I didn't have to use cash one single
time.
NOTE CONF
They're going to.
They're talking about abolishing cash in Sweden.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so so we've got to we've got an amount
NOTE CONF
of money we want to find change for.
I've to sort of make this a little bit understandable.
NOTE CONF
So I've used uh type synonyms total and coin for
integer.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a total amount of money that we
want to find change for.
NOTE CONF
And we've got a list of coins.
So these are the coins that are in the cash
NOTE CONF
register.
And we want to uh we want to produce all
NOTE CONF
the ways of using those coins to make exactly, um,
that amount of money.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
An example is down here at the bottom here.
NOTE CONF
So if you want to make change for 0.30 and
what you've got is this list of coins.
NOTE CONF
Right here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then there are whoops three ways of doing that.
For example two fives and two tens okay.
NOTE CONF
Um and here's an algorithm for doing that.
Um, so a little bit more complicated.
NOTE CONF
Um.
The first thing it does is sort the, the coins
NOTE CONF
into, into ascending order, okay.
Because that's required by this, by this helper function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So uh.
NOTE CONF
And it has to do partly with um, well, let's
just carry on here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, if we want to make change for zero,
NOTE CONF
it doesn't matter what coins we have.
There's only one way to do that.
NOTE CONF
And it's the empty list of coins.
If we want to make change for any other number.
NOTE CONF
So it's greater than zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then there's.
Here's a here's a list of all the ways to
NOTE CONF
do it.
And it uses this function splits which I which I
NOTE CONF
defined last time.
So splits is given a list.
NOTE CONF
It's all the ways of splitting it into one value
from the list and everything else in the list.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, uh, here's the list, you know, so
item three and everything else, or item seven and everything
NOTE CONF
else.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's what splits give you is a list of
all those possibilities.
NOTE CONF
And um, we need to ensure that they only occur
once each one of these only occurs once.
NOTE CONF
And the reason for that is to, um, is to
avoid getting, um, repetitions in here.
NOTE CONF
Um, exactly the same thing, um, more than once.
Um, corresponding to, um, you know, things like I make
NOTE CONF
change for 30.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
Oh, this.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this last one, if I didn't have that, then
NOTE CONF
here I would have two copies of this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, corresponding to, um, the making change with this ten
piece and the 20 piece or this ten piece and
NOTE CONF
the 20 piece.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's 210 pieces here in my in my cash register.
And so it would separately, um, give you those two
NOTE CONF
ways of making changes.
So that's why this number is in here okay.
NOTE CONF
So we pick we pick a coin from our list
of coins.
NOTE CONF
It has to be less than n, or else it
wouldn't be useful for making change for n.
NOTE CONF
And um, and then that coin is part of the
part of the, the list of coins that we're making
NOTE CONF
that we're using to make change.
And then we have the remaining the remaining coins, um,
NOTE CONF
which is uh, uh, so we have the main amount,
which is n minus y.
NOTE CONF
So we then need to make change for that using,
um, the remainder of the coins.
NOTE CONF
But um, only the ones that are larger than, wait
a minute, uh, that are larger than y.
NOTE CONF
Yes, that are larger than y.
This is what the filter does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're we're picking we're picking small coins and then
NOTE CONF
working up to big coins.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is what this filter does.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And um.
And all the ways of doing that.
NOTE CONF
All the, all the ways of doing that are possible
solutions here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, this gives you this result, and it's interesting
NOTE CONF
to think of what happens if there are no ways
of of, you know, you pick a coin.
NOTE CONF
Suppose you have, um, you have, uh, only two peas
in your cash register and you need to make change
NOTE CONF
for 0.05, so it's not possible.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you take you you start here by taking a
two peas, and then you need to make change for
NOTE CONF
0.03 from your list of 0.02 coins.
And then you pick another 0.02 and then it's.
NOTE CONF
And then you need to make change for one p
from your list of 0.02 coins.
NOTE CONF
And then this step fails because there's no way of
making change for one p from the list of, um,
NOTE CONF
0.02 coins.
And so and so your kind of partial attempt fails.
NOTE CONF
And so it's not included.
It's not.
NOTE CONF
It's not that you have to backtrack or do something
to have it fail.
NOTE CONF
It just it the, um, it's just that this expression
ends up delivering an empty list, and you can't take
NOTE CONF
any Zs from an empty list.
Okay, there aren't any.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is this is, um, a kind of a standard,
NOTE CONF
um, sort of challenge problem in computer science for, uh,
you know, like, how can you express this in a
NOTE CONF
program, a certain programming language, a certain bunch of features?
You know, if the programming languages allows backtracking or exceptions
NOTE CONF
or or something like that.
So this is the Haskell solution to it, which I
NOTE CONF
think is kind of nice.
But not but not trivial to understand.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let me get to my last problem, which is
a little bit more fun because it's, um, it's involving
NOTE CONF
games.
So this is the it's the eight queens problem, which
NOTE CONF
is a, um, uh, it's a chess problem and it's
a standard.
NOTE CONF
Another one of these standard problems in computer science for
how you how you solve this efficiently, um, using various
NOTE CONF
programming, uh, methods.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, I suppose that, um, I suppose that many
of you play chess, but it doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
Um, because I'm going to explain everything you need to
know.
NOTE CONF
So this is about queens.
So queens are, uh, here's a chess board and, uh,
NOTE CONF
here's how a black queen is represented, usually.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the queen is the most powerful, uh, piece in
chess.
NOTE CONF
Um, the king is the most important one, because if
you lose the king, you've lost the game.
NOTE CONF
But the queen is the one that has the most
sort of freedom of movement.
NOTE CONF
And so, um, what I was showing here is diagonal
movement.
NOTE CONF
So a queen can move diagonally in any direction as
far as far as it wants.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, uh, so, you know, this this queen here could
NOTE CONF
move diagonally.
Diagonally here or down there or over here or up
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, and the queen can also move horizontally and
vertically as far as at once.
NOTE CONF
So this queen could move all the way across this
row or all the way along this column.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so, um, so this queen, if you look at
NOTE CONF
the number of squares that are being swept out here,
it's, um, it's, uh, seven horizontally, seven vertically, uh, seven
NOTE CONF
on this diagonal and seven on this diagonal, plus the
one that is occupying.
NOTE CONF
So it's 29 spaces that a single queen is kind
of covering if you're talking about, you know, ability to
NOTE CONF
move from a particular position.
And, um, so that's that's a lot of squares.
NOTE CONF
And these are, these are sort of, you know, if
there's another if there's another piece, this is a black
NOTE CONF
queen.
So it's looking for white pieces to attack.
NOTE CONF
I mean, there's no white pieces on this particular picture.
If there's a white piece somewhere on this diagonal it
NOTE CONF
can capture it.
And and that's bad for the white side.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So and then the and then the eight queens.
NOTE CONF
Problem is, is it possible to put eight queens on
a chessboard in such a way that none of them,
NOTE CONF
uh, can attack any of the other ones?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if you think that each one covers 29 squares
and there's 64 squares on the chessboard, you might think
NOTE CONF
that this is a little bit difficult or possibly impossible,
but it is actually possible.
NOTE CONF
And here's a solution.
For instance, if you look at if you look at
NOTE CONF
this.
Okay, none of these, none of these pieces, you know,
NOTE CONF
let's look at this one for a change.
None of these, um, can attack any of the ones
NOTE CONF
you know.
So the the row is free, the column is free,
NOTE CONF
this diagonal is free, and that diagonal is free.
And that's the case for each one of these.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, so there are solutions.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you have to be careful how you generate
them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so I'm going to show you a generate and
NOTE CONF
test algorithm.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Generate and test is what I told you at the
beginning.
NOTE CONF
It's an algorithm where you enumerate possible solutions, and then
you check each of the solutions to see each of
NOTE CONF
the potential solutions to see if it's a real solution.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to show you how to do that.
But you have to be careful here because um, if
NOTE CONF
you.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so how many ways are there placing eight queens
on a on a chessboard with 64 places?
NOTE CONF
It's that many.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, so, you know, the number of ways of
choosing eight places out of 64, out of a list
NOTE CONF
of 64 places.
These are the eight places where the where the queens
NOTE CONF
are.
These are 64 places in the chess board.
NOTE CONF
So that's how many possible ways there are of putting
the queens on the chess board.
NOTE CONF
And this is, you know, 4.4.
Well, I'll write down the number.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
It's that many, that many choices.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we if we enumerate all the possible ways
NOTE CONF
of putting the queen on the chessboard.
That's how many we've got.
NOTE CONF
And then we have to look at each one of
these to see whether it's, um, it's going to be
NOTE CONF
a solution.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This would take a while.
It's possible program would terminate, but it would take a
NOTE CONF
while.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it helps to think a little bit before
doing this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's, uh, let's look at this board.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So one thing that's obvious is that if you've got
NOTE CONF
any, uh, if you got two queens on the same
row, then it's not going to be a solution because
NOTE CONF
they're going to be able to attack each other.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So each you know, if you look at solution here,
each solution has one queen in each row.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Just one.
NOTE CONF
There are eight rows, eight queens, one queen in each
row.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
If we take that into account, then, Um, the number
of solutions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We've got we've got eight rows and eight queens.
NOTE CONF
So the numbers of ways of placing eight queens, one
per row is this number, which is still 16 million.
NOTE CONF
It's still a lot.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
But it's a lot smaller than that number.
So this is, this is, um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, number of placements.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is, uh, one queen per row.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, but also kind of symmetrically, there's also only one
queen per column.
NOTE CONF
So each of these columns has only one queen in
it.
NOTE CONF
Eight columns, eight queens, one queen in each column.
So, um, so what we've got here, uh, is in
NOTE CONF
fact, um.
Eight factorial possibilities, which is, uh, only 40,000.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sorry, 40,000 odd.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Column.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to generate these and then we're going
to check each of them to see whether, um, it,
NOTE CONF
it, it allows a queen to attack another queen.
If so we throw it out.
NOTE CONF
So so here's my solution.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
My notes.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so so I said here eight factorial because it
NOTE CONF
corresponds to the number of permutations of, um, I mean,
if we look at a solution.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we're going to generate.
Uh, a list of these, these these positions are going
NOTE CONF
to be represented as, as, as lists of length eight.
And the um and each list of length eight is
NOTE CONF
um, uh, it'll contain numbers from 1 to 8 okay.
So list of length eight contents or numbers of length
NOTE CONF
eight.
And what the first, what the head of the list
NOTE CONF
represent is the, the row that the, um, that the
Queen and column one occupies.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the second thing in the list is going to
NOTE CONF
be the row that the Queen and column two occupy.
So this this permutation will be represented by um, 63724.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's a permutation of the numbers one through
eight.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's length eight because we've got eight columns.
NOTE CONF
All the numbers are of 1 to 8 because there's
eight rows.
NOTE CONF
And it's the permutation of those numbers from 1 to
8.
NOTE CONF
Because no queen can be.
No two queens can be in the same row.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so so here's my eight queens program.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's very simple.
It generates the permutations.
NOTE CONF
So the numbers from 1 to 8.
And then it filters them and extract the ones that
NOTE CONF
are okay in the sense that I'm going to explain
okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay means that they are actually solutions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we know whoops.
Because of the way that we've done this.
NOTE CONF
Because we're talking about a permutations from 1 to 8.
Going back to my diagram, okay.
NOTE CONF
We know that there's not going to be any problems
with attacks horizontally and vertically okay.
NOTE CONF
So we only have to worry about diagonal attacks.
So the way that the okay check works okay a
NOTE CONF
couple of helper functions here.
So it picks.
NOTE CONF
So given a given a permutation from this list.
It chooses two queens.
NOTE CONF
Well actually first it first it computes the coordinates of
all of these queens okay.
NOTE CONF
Which it does with the zip here.
So what's what's going on here.
NOTE CONF
So I said here that the permutation is 1586 etc..
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It does a zip with 12345678, which means the coordinates
you get our 1125384653 and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the result of this of the zip.
NOTE CONF
Gives you the coordinates Cartesian coordinates okay.
And then we choose two elements from this list of
NOTE CONF
Cartesian coordinates.
So this is the position of two queens.
NOTE CONF
And we check to see whether, uh, those two queens
can attack each other.
NOTE CONF
And we require that for all choices of two queens
that, um, that they can't attack each other.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So not attack each other is what this not check
NOTE CONF
is.
So check is, uh, chess terminology for, um, attack.
NOTE CONF
Um, more or less.
Okay, so they can't attack each other.
NOTE CONF
And that has to be case for all for all
of the, um, all of the choices of two queens.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which leads us to this last line here, um, computing
NOTE CONF
whether to, um, queens check each other or not.
And this is a, this is a clever little, um,
NOTE CONF
calculation that's done.
So let me draw it as a picture.
NOTE CONF
So we've got Queen number one.
Here.
NOTE CONF
And we've got Queen number two.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
They're all they're all in this quadrant of the Cartesian
plane.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And we're interested in the slope of this line.
NOTE CONF
If this slope is one, then they're on a diagonal
and they attack each other.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Same goes if, um, the picture is different and the
NOTE CONF
slope is minus one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Or in fact, if they're in the opposite direction on
the opposite orientation.
NOTE CONF
And the slope is one, but they're kind of reversed
or you know, so so this kind of for this,
NOTE CONF
there's kind of four possibilities of the way these are
in relation to each other.
NOTE CONF
And then the question is always about is the slope
is a slope 1 or -1.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So how do you compute the slope.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um this distance here is um y prime minus
NOTE CONF
y.
This distance here is x prime minus x.
NOTE CONF
And so the slope is um, well uh okay.
The slope is uh x prime minus.
NOTE CONF
X.
Over y prime minus y.
NOTE CONF
And this is equal to one if and only if
these two numbers are equal.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this boils down to testing whether.
Whoops.
NOTE CONF
Whether uh.
Oh well I did it the other way around.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Instead of x prime minus y I did I did
NOTE CONF
x minus x prime.
But um it doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
Um and y minus y prime doesn't matter because um,
so I basically I'm testing to see whether they're equal,
NOTE CONF
but I'm testing whether the absolute values are equal because
that deals with, um, slope of one, slope of minus
NOTE CONF
one, and the situation where the points are oriented the
other way around.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this covers all of these different possibilities.
NOTE CONF
And if and only if the absolute values of these
two differences are equal are the things I'm on a
NOTE CONF
diagonal.
So.
NOTE CONF
And um, yeah, I can't run it on my laptop
because I don't have my adaptor.
NOTE CONF
But if you run this, it's, um, it's surprisingly fast.
It takes, you know, a 10th of a second.
NOTE CONF
And the the solution here is the one that I
had a second ago in the picture.
NOTE CONF
So one five, eight six, three seven, etc. um, uh,
158637, etc..
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, and I can also check to see how
NOTE CONF
many of solutions there are in there.
92 solutions.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that only takes, it only takes, you know,
a bit more than a second to generate them all.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In fact, um, 92 solutions, but, um, there's not 92
NOTE CONF
kind of individual solutions because there's lots of symmetries here.
So, um, if you've got if you've got a solution,
NOTE CONF
then if you, if you rotate along the vertical axis,
that's also a solution.
NOTE CONF
Or if you rotate along the horizontal axis is also
solution.
NOTE CONF
Or if you do both of them, it's also a
solution.
NOTE CONF
Or if you rotate, it's also a solution.
And so I don't know how many really completely different
NOTE CONF
solutions there are, but um, uh, anyway, 92 is uh,
is the number of solutions represented this way.
NOTE CONF
And that is my last slide and I'm just on
time.
NOTE CONF
So thank you for your attention.
And this is actually my last lecture of this course.
NOTE CONF
Um, because next week, um, Phil Wadler is talking about
monads.
NOTE CONF
Monads are are things that many people who learn about
Last Haskell get very excited about.
NOTE CONF
And you will find all sorts of tutorials on the
internet explaining them to you.
NOTE CONF
So.
And Phil invented them.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, you want to hear him talk about them.
And then in the, in the week after next, um,
NOTE CONF
no lecture on Monday unless Phil needs it to finish
monads and Tuesday is, um, prize giving for the competition.
NOTE CONF
Plus Phil yet again, uh, doing a special lecture on
combinations between logic and and functional programming.
NOTE CONF
So, um, see you then.
Uh, and, uh, make sure you come to those lectures.
NOTE CONF
Phil is a scintillating lecturer, and especially the last one
is a special event.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So thank you.
NOTE CONF
And, uh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And I'll clap for you, too.
Okay.
NOTE CONF